---
title: "Section 2"
metaTitle: "This is the title tag of this page"
metaDescription: "Causes of WWI"
---
## Causes of the First World War
### Assasination of Prince Ferdinand
> 3)  The annexation of Texas was one of the key moments that precipitated the Mexican-American War. Following Texas's 1836 declaration of independence from Mexico, the United States was faced with the complex "Texas Question," a dilemma that put the country's unity to the test and sparked passionate discussions both at home and abroad.
Texas, calling itself the Lone Star Republic, applied to become a member of the US, an alluring proposition for those who were zealous about Manifest Destiny. The excellent soil and abundant economic potential of the Texan environment attracted American immigrants, and the prospect of annexation strongly appealed to expansionist emotions. 
But the annexation process was paved with political scheming and contentious discussions that highlighted the divisions within the US government.
Slavery, a divisive topic that had long clouded American politics, was at the center of the controversy. Texas, a region with a sizable population of slave owners, presented a challenge to legislators and political figures. The potential for Texas' annexation to upend the delicate balance between slave and free states in the Union led to a major dispute over whether Texas would join as a slave or free state.
The 1844 presidential election was the pinnacle of political scheming over the Texas Question. The Democratic nominee turned out to be James K. Polk, a devout expansionist and Manifest Destiny proponent who made annexing Texas one of his main agenda items. Henry Clay, his opponent, had to navigate the contentious topic without alienating voters. With Polk's win perceived as support for the annexation plan, the election turned into a referendum on Texas's future.
Despite the political impetus, there was strong opposition to annexation, especially from individuals who didn't want to incite conflict with Mexico. Critics expressed worries about the possibility of war and the spread of slavery into new areas, among them notable Whigs and abolitionists. The threat of annexation raised the possibility of war with Mexico since it may heighten already-existing tensions and spark a wider conflict.
The internal conflicts of the country and the precarious balance between expansionist enthusiasm and practical considerations of national interest were represented in the congressional debates. In the end, Congress authorized Texas' annexation in 1845, which was a critical turning point in American history regarding its westward expansion. But this choice had an impact that went beyond domestic politics, adding to the growing hostilities that would eventually lead to the Mexican-American War.
The Texas Question perfectly captures the intricacies of American expansionism in the middle of the 19th century with its complicated interaction of political maneuvering, regional interests, and the slavery argument. As a microcosm of the larger ideological and geopolitical forces at work during this revolutionary era, it illuminates the difficulties encountered by a country attempting to balance its manifest destiny with the facts of a contested and evolving environment.
